---
title: "iDrone reprint: The Perfect Programming Language"
date: 2008-01-09 19:49:00 +0000
categories:
  - Programming
  - iDrone
blogger_orig_url: /2008/01/idrone-reprint-perfect-programming.html
---

iDrone reprint: The Perfect Programming Language<br />By Matt Ball, written some time in 2006<br /><br />I’ve recently become interested in finding the ‘perfect’ programming language. This is mostly because I use one of the more out-dated languages, “C”. I work as an embedded software (firmware) engineer, where I create firmware for tape drives. Embedded systems is one of the few industries that hasn’t switched wholesale to Java or one of the .NET variants. As a result, I’m stuck in a sea of developers who have been programming C and nothing but C for the last 20 years. Just to retain my sanity, I’ve got to look at other approaches.  <p>The idea of a ‘perfect’ language is a little far-fetched, but makes a good started point for knowing what to look for in a new language. If a perfect language existed, it would likely have some of these features:</p>  <ul><li>Compiles to code that runs as fast as C (or even faster).  This removes the excuse to ever use C (or C++).</li><li>Does not use a pre-processor</li><li>Contains built-in garbage collection</li><li>Allows creation of low-level data structures and data types.</li><li>Natively supports integers of any size, between a single bit and an arbitrary large number of bits (BigNum). Along the same lines, natively supports modulo arithmetic to facilitate RSA and D-H cryptography (e.g. X * Y mod Z).</li><li>Supports all the ‘good’ object oriented features, including single inheritance (not multiple like C++)</li><li>Provides a build-in mechanism for determining whether parameters and data can be trusted.</li></ul>  <p>The list goes on from there.</p>  <p>Relating to this subject, I found an interesting <a target="_blank" href="http://developers.slashdot.org/developers/06/03/08/0241237.shtml">Slashdot article</a> talking about someone from IBM that is doing a series on a similar topic. He’s approaching the problem from the perspective of a Java programmer looking at other languages, but the goal is roughly the same: look at several programming languages and find their strengths and weaknesses.</p>  <p>One good language that I found is the <a target="_blank" href="http://www.digitalmars.com/d/">“D” programming language</a>. This language is meant as an enhancement to C and C++, and provides several of the things in the list above. Unfortunately, D is still in the beta stage, so it’s not possible to use this in a real product. It also doesn’t have any books that I know of (having a book is one of <a target="_blank" href="http://www.paulgraham.com/">Paul Graham</a>’s requirements for a good programming language).</p>  <p>Of course, there are many other good programming languages out there, like Ruby, Python, and Lisp, but none of these languages compile tightly enough, or provide enough low-level control for embedded systems. This ‘perfect’ language needs to have the ability to compile small, if needed.</p>  <p>Finding the perfect language will be a long journey, but in the end I expect it will be well-worth the time, and if nothing else, will provide insight into how to use existing languages more effectively.</p>