---
title: "RSA 2008: Cryptographer's Panel"
date: 2008-04-08 18:02:00 +0000
categories:
  - Cryptography
  - News
blogger_orig_url: /2008/04/rsa-2008-cryptographers-panel.html
---

As one of the great highlights of the RSA Conference is the cryptographer's panel with the great  experts of modern public key cryptography: Whitfield Diffie, Martin Hellman of Diffie-Hellman fame (discrete log crypto) and Ron Rivest and Adi Shamir of RSA fame (crypto based on the integer factorization problem -- used in SSL).<br /><br />This is a rough draft post that will be cleaned up later, but contains the last part of the discussion:<br /><br />Question from Burt: Where would you put your research effort?<br />Diffie: I'd put research into genetics - We'll see the first child made from two women, showing that men are an expensive and unnecessary thing to have around.<br />Hellman: We need to become more rational in our approach to security<br /><br />Closing remarks:<br />Diffie: I'm optimistic about this subject.  People are going to get along just fine -- cyber security is very important.  The most important thing in the 20th century is client server computing.  By putting important information onto a single computer, it's possible to control access. -- Something's going to happen that we don't expect, from younger people<br />Hellman: Don't be afraid to tackle problems<br />Rivest: (countering Diffie): There is a lot of cryto still to be discovered.  We're still at the early stages of tying worst-case complexity to best-case complexity -- how to run crypto protocols in parallel so that they don't interfere -- we need the secure platform -- next problem is user interfaces<br />Shamir: It's about subtlety behind the schenes --- multiple lines of defense -- most of the basic elements are there.  But we haven't reached nirvana -- we need to develop tools and techniques -- a GPS for data, need the ability to located where your data is.  Use 160-bit sha-1 summary to help locate this data.  This could help the information management problem<br /><br />Burt: 1024-bit RSA -- how much longer before the publicly announced factorization<br />Shamir - next year<br />Hellman - I was at Certicom -- Elliptic curves have been rock-solid since inception<br />Rivest - Use Moores law - There are low-probability algorithms that are hard to predict<br />Burt  -2010 is the transition to 2048 bit keys<br /><br />These guests will be in the crypto commons for more discussion.